README.md, before:


# rkstiff #

Runge-Kutta nonlinear-PDE solver for equations of the form 
<code>u<sub>t</sub> = Lu + NL(u)</code> with adaptive-step
Runge-Kutta methods using either integrating factor (IF) or exponential time-differencing (ETD).
Some examples of non-linear PDES that can be numerically solved using these methods are:
- Nonlinear Schrodinger equation (NLS)
- Kuramoto-Sivashinsky (KS)
- Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) 
- Burgers
- Allen-Cahn
- Sine-Gordon

The adaptive step solver
options provided in this package are
1. ETD35  (5<sup>th</sup> order ETD with 3<sup>rd</sup> orderembedding)
2. ETD34 (4<sup>th</sup> order ETD with 3<sup>rd</sup> order embedding)
3. IF34 (4<sup>th</sup> order IF with 3<sup>rd</sup> order embedding)
4. IF45DP (5<sup>th</sup> order IF with 4<sup>th</sup> order embedding) 

In general, one should
prefer ETD35 as it often has the best speed and stability for diagonal systems or diagonalized
non-diagonal systems. Because the RK coefficients can be costly
to compute IF34 can also be a good option in certain cases. 
A detailed discussion of these solvers is provided in the journal article  <a href = https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999114006743> Exponential time-differencing with embedded Runge–Kutta adaptive step control </a>.

# Dependencies

Package requires
<ul>
<li> numpy </li>
<li> scipy </li>
</ul>
Tested with versions
<ul>
<li> numpy = 1.19.2 </li>
<li> scipy = 1.6.0 </li>
</ul>


# Usage #

Each of the solvers is a python class (UPPERCASE) stored in a module of the same name (lowercase). Initializing each class requires two arguments, a linear operator `L` in the form of a numpy array, and a nonlinear function `NL(u)`. The solvers can then be proagated either by using the solver.step function (user steps through time) or using the solver.evolve function (stepping handled internally). For example 

```python
from rkstiff import etd35
L = # some linear operator 
def NL(u): #  nonlinear function defined here 
solver = etd35.ETD35(linop=L,NLfunc=NL)
u0 = # initial field to be propagated 
t0 =  # initial time 
tf = # final time
uf = solver.evolve(u0,t0=t0,tf=tf)
```

By default, when using the function evolve, the field is stored at each step in a python list: u0,u1,...,uf are stored in solver.u. The corresponding times t0,t1,...,tf are stored in solver.t.

# Example #

Consider the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky (KS) equation: 
<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
 u<sub>t</sub> = -u<sub>xx</sub> - u<sub>xxxx</sub> - uu<sub>x</sub>. 
 
 Converting to spectral space using a Fourier transform (F) we have 
<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
v<sub>t</sub> = k<sub>x</sub><sup>2</sup>(1- k<sub>x</sub><sup>2</sup>)v - F \{ F<sup>-1</sup> \{v\} F<sup>-1</sup>\{ i k<sub>x</sub> v\} \} 
<br>
where v = F{u}. We can then plug L = k<sub>x</sub><sup>2</sup>(1- k<sub>x</sub><sup>2</sup>), and NL(u) =  - F \{ F<sup>-1</sup> \{v\} F<sup>-1</sup>\{ i k<sub>x</sub> v\} \} into an rkstiff solver and propagate the field u in spectral space, converting back to real space when desired. For exampe, the python code may look something like this
```python
import numpy as np
from rkstiff import grids
from rkstiff import if34

# uniform grid spacing, real-valued u -> construct_x_kx_rfft
N = 8192
a,b = 0,32*np.pi
x,kx = grids.construct_x_kx_rfft(N,a,b) 

L = kx**2*(1-kx**2)
def NL(uFFT):
    u = np.fft.irfft(uFFT)
    ux = np.fft.irfft(1j*kx*uFFT)
    return -np.fft.rfft(u*ux)

u0 = np.cos(x/16)*(1.+np.sin(x/16))
u0FFT = np.fft.rfft(u0)
solver = if34.IF34(linop=L,NLfunc=NL)
ufFFT = solver.evolve(u0FFT,t0=0,tf=50,store_freq=20) # store every 20th step in solver.u and solver.t
U = []
for uFFT in solver.u:
    U.append(np.fft.irfft(uFFT))
U = np.array(U)
t = np.array(solver.t)
```

The grid module in rkstiff has several useful helper functions for setting up spatial and spectral grids. Here we used it to construct grids for a real-valued `u` utilizing the real-valued numpy Fourier transform (rfft). The results of the KS 'chaotic' propagation are shown below. 
<br>

<img width="300" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/whalenpt/rkstiff/master/images/KSfig.png">

# Installation #

From the github source
```bash
git clone https://github.com/whalenpt/rkstiff.git
cd rkstiff
python3 -m pip install numpy scipy
python3 -m pip install .
```

PyPI install with a virtualenv (see the <a href = https://packaging.python.org/guides/installing-using-pip-and-virtual-environments/> Python Packaging Authority </a> guide)
```bash
python3 -m venv env
source env/bin/activate
python3 -m pip install rkstiff
```

For use with Anaconda using the conda-forge channel (see the <a href = https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/getting-started.html> Getting started with conda guide</a>), from the terminal
```bash
conda create --name rkstiff-env
conda activate rkstiff-env
conda install rkstiff -c conda-forge
```

The demos require installation of the python `matplotlib` and `jupyter` packages in addition to `numpy` and `scipy`. The tests require installation of the python package `pytest`. 


# License #
This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](./LICENSE) file for details.

# Citation #

```text
@article{WHALEN2015579,
title = {Exponential time-differencing with embedded Runge–Kutta adaptive step control},
journal = {Journal of Computational Physics},
volume = {280},
pages = {579-601},
year = {2015},
author = {P. Whalen and M. Brio and J.V. Moloney}
}
```

# Contact #
Patrick Whalen - whalenpt@gmail.com

Commit message:

README changed to reflect addition of constant step methods.

README.md, after:


# rkstiff #

Runge-Kutta integrating factor (IF) and exponential time-differencing (ETD) methods
for solving nonlinear-PDE's of the form <code>u<sub>t</sub> = Lu + NL(u)</code>. 
Some examples of non-linear PDES that can be numerically solved using these methods are:
- Nonlinear Schrodinger equation (NLS)
- Kuramoto-Sivashinsky (KS)
- Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) 
- Burgers
- Allen-Cahn
- Sine-Gordon

The adaptive step solver
options provided in this package are
1. ETD35  (5<sup>th</sup> order ETD with 3<sup>rd</sup> orderembedding)
2. ETD34 (4<sup>th</sup> order ETD with 3<sup>rd</sup> order embedding)
3. IF34 (4<sup>th</sup> order IF with 3<sup>rd</sup> order embedding)
4. IF45DP (5<sup>th</sup> order IF with 4<sup>th</sup> order embedding) 

The constant step solver options provided are
1. ETD4 (4<sup>th</sup> order ETD - Krogstad method)
2. ETD5 (5<sup>th</sup> order ETD - same as the 5th order method in ETD35)
3. IF4 (4<sup>th</sup> order IF - same as the 4th order method in IF34)

In general, one should
prefer ETD35 as it often has the best speed and stability for diagonal systems or diagonalized
non-diagonal systems. Because the RK coefficients can be costly
to compute, IF34 or constant step methods may be preferable in certain settings.
A detailed discussion of these solvers is provided in the journal article  <a href = https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999114006743> Exponential time-differencing with embedded Runge–Kutta adaptive step control </a>.

# Dependencies

Package requires
<ul>
<li> numpy </li>
<li> scipy </li>
</ul>
Tested with versions
<ul>
<li> numpy = 1.19.2 </li>
<li> scipy = 1.6.0 </li>
</ul>


# Usage #

Each of the solvers is a python class (UPPERCASE) stored in a module of the same name (lowercase). Initializing each class requires two arguments, a linear operator `L` in the form of a numpy array, and a nonlinear function `NL(u)`. The solvers can then be proagated either by using the solver.step function (user steps through time) or using the solver.evolve function (stepping handled internally). For example 

```python
from rkstiff import etd35
L = # some linear operator 
def NL(u): #  nonlinear function defined here 
solver = etd35.ETD35(linop=L,NLfunc=NL)
u0 = # initial field to be propagated 
t0 =  # initial time 
tf = # final time
uf = solver.evolve(u0,t0=t0,tf=tf)
```

By default, when using the function evolve, the field is stored at each step in a python list: u0,u1,...,uf are stored in solver.u. The corresponding times t0,t1,...,tf are stored in solver.t.

# Example #

Consider the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky (KS) equation: 
<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
 u<sub>t</sub> = -u<sub>xx</sub> - u<sub>xxxx</sub> - uu<sub>x</sub>. 
 
 Converting to spectral space using a Fourier transform (F) we have 
<br>
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;
v<sub>t</sub> = k<sub>x</sub><sup>2</sup>(1- k<sub>x</sub><sup>2</sup>)v - F \{ F<sup>-1</sup> \{v\} F<sup>-1</sup>\{ i k<sub>x</sub> v\} \} 
<br>
where v = F{u}. We can then plug L = k<sub>x</sub><sup>2</sup>(1- k<sub>x</sub><sup>2</sup>), and NL(u) =  - F \{ F<sup>-1</sup> \{v\} F<sup>-1</sup>\{ i k<sub>x</sub> v\} \} into an rkstiff solver and propagate the field u in spectral space, converting back to real space when desired. For exampe, the python code may look something like this
```python
import numpy as np
from rkstiff import grids
from rkstiff import if34

# uniform grid spacing, real-valued u -> construct_x_kx_rfft
N = 8192
a,b = 0,32*np.pi
x,kx = grids.construct_x_kx_rfft(N,a,b) 

L = kx**2*(1-kx**2)
def NL(uFFT):
    u = np.fft.irfft(uFFT)
    ux = np.fft.irfft(1j*kx*uFFT)
    return -np.fft.rfft(u*ux)

u0 = np.cos(x/16)*(1.+np.sin(x/16))
u0FFT = np.fft.rfft(u0)
solver = if34.IF34(linop=L,NLfunc=NL)
ufFFT = solver.evolve(u0FFT,t0=0,tf=50,store_freq=20) # store every 20th step in solver.u and solver.t
U = []
for uFFT in solver.u:
    U.append(np.fft.irfft(uFFT))
U = np.array(U)
t = np.array(solver.t)
```

The grid module in rkstiff has several useful helper functions for setting up spatial and spectral grids. Here we used it to construct grids for a real-valued `u` utilizing the real-valued numpy Fourier transform (rfft). The results of the KS 'chaotic' propagation are shown below. 
<br>

<img width="300" src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/whalenpt/rkstiff/master/images/KSfig.png">

# Installation #

From the github source
```bash
git clone https://github.com/whalenpt/rkstiff.git
cd rkstiff
python3 -m pip install numpy scipy
python3 -m pip install .
```

PyPI install with a virtualenv (see the <a href = https://packaging.python.org/guides/installing-using-pip-and-virtual-environments/> Python Packaging Authority </a> guide)
```bash
python3 -m venv env
source env/bin/activate
python3 -m pip install rkstiff
```

For use with Anaconda using the conda-forge channel (see the <a href = https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/getting-started.html> Getting started with conda guide</a>), from the terminal
```bash
conda create --name rkstiff-env
conda activate rkstiff-env
conda install rkstiff -c conda-forge
```

The demos require installation of the python `matplotlib` and `jupyter` packages in addition to `numpy` and `scipy`. The tests require installation of the python package `pytest`. 


# License #
This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](./LICENSE) file for details.

# Citation #

```text
@article{WHALEN2015579,
title = {Exponential time-differencing with embedded Runge–Kutta adaptive step control},
journal = {Journal of Computational Physics},
volume = {280},
pages = {579-601},
year = {2015},
author = {P. Whalen and M. Brio and J.V. Moloney}
}
```

# Contact #
Patrick Whalen - whalenpt@gmail.com
